---
title: Session Summaries by Marques Océane
abstract: Summary
authors:
  - Marques-id
date: 2024-10-15
---

## Maps, 16/10/2024

This 5th course taught us more about maps, and particularly the “StoryMaps” tool. After trying our best to represent the Belval campus on a map, we learned more about Geographic Information Systems (GIS), which are analysis and visualization tools that go beyond the simple creation of maps. 2 leading software packages exist: ArcGIS and QGIS. These programs enable to superimpose different layers of information. This course reminded me that maps are an essential tool for researchers and historians because of their considerable informative impact. In addition to star maps or location maps, there are also topographic maps, also known as reference maps and thematic maps.
What I also learned was the difference between location and place. Place, unlike location, which acts as a landmark, is a kind of social construct. For example, we call our university campus in Belval “campus”, but people in the financial sector might refer to it as “Fond Belval”. It all depends on people's contexts and perspectives. 
My group then focused on a project entitled “History of the Olympic Marathon, 1896-2020”, created using the interactive tool “StoryMaps”. In addition to the runners' personal details, the different durations of each winner's 42-kilometer race could be compared. This project, which highlighted the evolution of runners' performances, and the participation of women, did, in my opinion, raise questions about scale and physical representation. However, as a historian wishing to teach, I find that “StoryMaps” can make learning history livelier and more interactive for students, that way, enriching their educational experience.

## Online Newspaper Archives, 09/10/2024

The course got off to an exciting start with the introduction of a new platform, “Impresso”, which highlights the importance of newspapers as witnesses to past knowledge, where valuable ideas are preserved. I was a little skeptical about its use and real utility. However, thanks to the group work, I was able to see that this tool could be complementary, especially when combined with resources such as eluxemburgensia. My colleague and I compared the results obtained by searching for our villages, “Saeul” and “Bascharage” respectively. Not understanding why the term “Saeul” had (many) more mentions in newspapers than “Bascharage” - even in non-Luxembourg newspapers - we soon realized that the searches were confusing “Saeul” with the German term “Säule”.
During the course, I also discovered a new concept: the scientific term “OCR”, which I'd never heard of before. On the other hand, I found it a pity that the part devoted to the “Github” tool was dispatched in just 15 minutes. That was a lot of information to assimilate in a short space of time. Fortunately, we received a PDF file to guide us through the rest, which made it easier to understand the tool. Personally, not being very comfortable with technology, I sometimes find it difficult to master these tools. However, I realize that it's essential to take the time to explore them in greater depth, as they offer interesting opportunities for research, analysis and comparison.

## Web archives, 02/10/2024

This lesson made us aware of the importance of web archives and the evolution and conservation of data. From more personal information-such as life details or works of individuals- to more scientific and journalistic elements, the different groups showed us how these archives are becoming increasingly popular.
Our group analyzed in detail the evolution of the “Luxembourg.lu” web page. We examined how the categories and subcategories of the site have changed between 1996 and 2024, highlighting what aspects were given more pertinence over time, as well as the little change in the URL, but the new site also offers the possibility of changing languages. A major tool for this analysis was the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine. It gave us the possibility to observe how many times the website was captured, using this as a measure of how the internet itself has evolved over the years, but also providing concrete data on its changes. This lesson aroused my curiosity, and this theme also raised some questions about the future of this type of work and tool, for example: how can the accessibility of archived data be improved to enable more in-depth analysis by historians or researchers?
To conclude, I have learned that digital preservation tools can offer wise analyses of societal trends and changes in terms of the presentation of information and in the growth of importance of web-based data over time, demonstrated by the example of the portal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.

## From Sources to Data, 25/09/2024

In recent years, the word “data” has become more common, often referring to various types of sources. Historically, the term originated from mathematicians, but after the 18th century, it has come to apply to any field of intellectual activity. “Data” refers to small elements like observations or measurements. For example, a dataset in an Excel sheet may include rows of tweets, with each row representing one tweet. The process of exporting the tweet into the sheet involves converting it into data, likely including details like the tweet’s text, time, user, etc. Therefore, the distinction between data and metadata is important: in this case data refers to the raw information, while metadata provides details like when the tweet was posted, by whom, location and other contextual elements. In other words, metadata helps organize and contextualize sources. This additional information helps historians, or simple users, to understand the context and provenance of the source, making it safer and easier to reuse. Finally, I also learned that tools like “NGram” can help analyze data trends but require specific conditions to use effectively.
In some way, this lesson was useful for my historical studies because it helps me understand how data and metadata are used to organize, contextualize and analyze historical sources. Even if it was difficult at first, it gave me a better overview of the digital tools that can enrich research, especially int the way information is structures and preserved. It also sparked my curiosity by giving me a different perspective on the evolution of archival practices and how they influence historical research today.   

